



Network Modeling                                              C. Cardona
Internet-Draft                                                       NTT
Intended status: Informational                                 B. Claise
Expires: 27 December 2025                                 Everything OPS
                                                            25 June 2025


  Guidelines for YANG Example Validation and Coverage Analysis in IETF
                               Documents
            draft-cardona-claise-onion-yang-coverage-latest

Abstract

   This document defines guidelines for including YANG example instances
   in IETF documents in a way that enables automatic extraction and
   validation.  It introduces the concept of YANG module "coverage" to
   measure how thoroughly example instances exercise a YANG module's
   data nodes.  The goal is to improve the quality and usability of YANG
   models in IETF documents by providing authors with tools to validate
   their examples and assess coverage completeness.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 27 December 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Including YANG Example Instances in IETF Documents
     2.1.  Types of Example Validation
       2.1.1.  Simple Validation Examples
       2.1.2.  Complex Examples with External References
     2.2.  Including Auxiliary YANG Modules for Examples
   3.  YANG Module Coverage by Examples
     3.1.  Coverage Example
     3.2.  Coverage Across Multiple Documents
   4.  Implementation
   5.  Conclusion
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Although the YANG data modeling language has been in use for over a
   decade, there remains a lack of tooling to help YANG model authors
   analyze and validate their YANG modules and example instances.
   People defining or evaluating YANG modules have limited guidance on
   how to include and test example data for those modules.  Example data
   instances are vital to illustrate how a model is intended to be used,
   but the guidelines for presenting and validating these examples are
   scarce.  The updated guidelines in RFC 8407bis improve the situation,
   but gaps still exist in providing tools that can automatically give
   authors feedback on what they might be missing in their models.

   The objective of this document is to define guidelines that enable
   the development of tools which, given one or more IETF documents
   (RFCs or drafts), can verify that the YANG model examples in those
   documents are correct and sufficiently comprehensive.  To achieve
   this, we address two main aspects:

   *  Guidelines for Including YANG Examples in RFCs: A clear method for
      authors to include example data instances of YANG models in IETF
      documents in a way that tools can automatically extract and
      validate them.  In addition, we outline how tools can perform this
      extraction and validation, and we propose a method to include
      extra YANG modules (when necessary) for validating more complex
      examples without affecting the main normative content.

   *  Definition of YANG Module "Coverage": A new concept to measure how
      much of a YANG module's data nodes are exercised by the example
      instances in a document.  By analyzing the examples, a tool can
      inform authors which parts of their YANG model are covered and
      which are still missing from the examples.  A proof-of-concept
      implementation for computing such coverage is also considered.

   Scope: The proposals in this document focus on typical use cases.  It
   is expected that proof-of-concept tools will confirm the viability of
   these methods for moderately complex examples as this document
   progresses.  If such automatic validation proves infeasible in
   practice, the approach may need adjustment.  Extremely complex
   example scenarios (e.g., those involving schema mount or highly
   dynamic state) are outside the current scope and could be addressed
   in future work.

2.  Including YANG Example Instances in IETF Documents

   When authors include example YANG instances in an RFC or Internet-
   Draft, those example instances SHOULD be formatted in a way that
   allows automatic extraction and validation by tools.

   Specifically, example instances SHOULD be enclosed as code blocks
   using the CODE BEGINS / CODE ENDS convention (as defined in the
   updated guidelines, e.g., draft-ietf-netmod-rfc8407bis).  They should
   also be given a file name that clearly identifies them as examples,
   analogous to how YANG modules are named (see RFC 8407bis guidelines).
   We propose that the file name ends with the suffix .instance.xml for
   XML instances or .instance.json for JSON instances.  This naming
   convention makes it easy for tools to identify which code snippets
   are YANG instance examples that can be parsed and validated.

   Each example file name SHOULD be unique within a document (and
   ideally unique across related documents being analyzed together).
   Tools may complain or error out if they encounter duplicate example
   file names, since that could indicate conflicting or repeated
   content.  For example, an XML instance might be included as:

   // Not an actual instance
   <CODE BEGINS> file "interface-config.instance.xml"
   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   <data> ... </data>
   <CODE ENDS>

   And a JSON instance as:

   // Not an actual instance
   <CODE BEGINS> file "interface-config.instance.json"
   {
     "interface": { ... }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

   By following this approach, a tool can scan the document for code
   blocks with filenames ending in .instance.xml or .instance.json,
   extract their contents, and validate them against the appropriate
   YANG modules.

   In cases where an included code snippet is not meant to represent a
   valid YANG instance (for instance, it might be pseudocode, a partial
   fragment, or intentionally invalid to illustrate an error), the
   author can indicate this so that automated validators skip it.  For
   example, an author might choose not to use the CODE BEGINS/CODE ENDS
   markers or might omit the special .instance.xml/.json filename suffix
   for such a snippet.  Without the markers or filename, the tool will
   know not to treat that snippet as a YANG instance example to be
   validated.  An author could also include an explicit note in the text
   indicating that a given snippet is not for validation.  Using these
   conventions strikes a balance between making examples machine-
   checkable and allowing flexibility for authors to include non-valid
   illustrative snippets when necessary.

2.1.  Types of Example Validation

   Not all example instances are the same in terms of validation.  Many
   YANG examples in documentation are simple and only involve the module
   defined in the document, but in more complex scenarios an example
   might span multiple modules or need knowledge of deviations,
   features, or other context.  For the latter, wrapping the example in
   an instance data file format (defined by RFC 9195) can make explicit
   which modules and context are in use.  This approach can handle more
   complicated example validation at the cost of a bit more verbosity.
   (If a given example scenario is too complex to easily capture even
   with the instance-data file format - for example, requiring extensive
   setup or dynamic state - it is considered out of scope for automatic
   validation in this document.)  We distinguish between two categories
   of examples for validation purposes:

2.1.1.  Simple Validation Examples

   These are straightforward examples that instantiate YANG modules
   defined in the same document, with a self-contained context.  An
   extraction tool can load the YANG module(s) defined in the document
   (plus any standard modules they import) and then validate the example
   instance against those modules.  For instance, if a draft defines a
   YANG module example-interfaces and provides a small XML snippet
   configuring an interface, the tool will use the example-interfaces
   module (and any of its dependencies) to verify that the XML conforms
   to the schema.  In general, simple examples illustrate how to use the
   module(s) in the draft and can be validated with minimal additional
   information beyond what the document itself provides.

2.1.2.  Complex Examples with External References

   These are examples that require additional context or external
   modules beyond those defined in the current document.  For example,
   an instance data set may involve multiple modules (perhaps a module
   from this draft plus some from other RFCs), or it might describe
   operational state data that requires a specific datastore context or
   feature set.  For such cases, we propose that the example be
   presented as a self-contained YANG instance data file using the
   standard format defined in RFC 9195 (the YANG Instance Data File
   Format).  In practice, this means the example should be wrapped in
   the instance-data-set structure which includes the necessary metadata
   (such as module names, revisions, feature toggle states, and target
   datastore) for validation.

   For an XML-formatted complex example, the first element of the
   snippet should be <instance-data-set
   xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-instance-data">, with
   the content formatted according to RFC 9195.  Inside this element,
   sub-elements specify what YANG content schema the instance data
   conforms to (including module names, revision dates, features,
   deviations, and the intended datastore).  Similarly, for a JSON-
   formatted complex example, the top-level JSON object should have a
   single key "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set", whose value
   is an object providing the same kind of metadata and the actual data
   set.  By using the RFC 9195 instance-data-set wrapper, all the
   information needed to validate the instance is included within the
   text itself.  A validation tool like yanglint (with appropriate
   support for RFC 9195) can read the instance-data-set, automatically
   load the indicated modules and their revisions, apply any stated
   deviations or feature enables, and then verify the embedded data
   content against the assembled schema.  Note that if a tool detects
   that an example instance uses the RFC 9195 instance data format, it
   will attempt to validate it accordingly - and the example instance
   will fail validation if it does not conform to the declared schema or
   constraints.

2.2.  Including Auxiliary YANG Modules for Examples

   Sometimes an example instance cannot be validated or understood
   without additional YANG definitions that are not part of the main
   module in the document.  A common case is the use of YANG deviations
   or vendor-specific augmentations to adapt a base model.  In
   principle, deviations are meant to be extraordinary measures (and
   their use is discouraged in final standards), but in practice they
   are sometimes used in industry deployments.

   To illustrate how a deviation or augmentation affects the data, an
   RFC might need to include a small auxiliary YANG module (for example,
   a module that contains deviation statements targeting the base model)
   purely for use in the example validation.  The challenge is to do
   this without confusing readers or tools and without "contaminating"
   the main normative content of the document.  We propose the following
   guidelines for including such auxiliary YANG modules in examples:

   *  Use a Distinct File Extension: Include the auxiliary module as a
      code block with a filename that uses a different extension than
      ".yang".  For example, use a suffix like .dyang for a deviation/
      augmentation module that is only for the example.  Using a non-
      standard extension ensures that general YANG module extraction
      tools will not treat it as a normative YANG module from the
      document.  Any example that requires this auxiliary module can
      then reference it by its filename (with the .dyang extension) when
      running the validation tool.

   *  Clearly Identify the Module as Non-Normative: The auxiliary module
      should be clearly identified as an example-only, non-normative
      module.  This can be achieved through both its naming and its
      content.  For instance, the CODE BEGINS label could name it
      something like "example-device-deviations.dyang" (including words
      like "example" or "dev" in the filename to signal its purpose).
      In the module source itself, use a module name and namespace that
      indicate it is not an official module.  For example, use a
      namespace URI containing "example.com" or similar, and perhaps a
      module name ending in -example or with a clearly indicative name.

   *  Explain in the Narrative: In the text surrounding the code,
      explicitly state that this module is an auxiliary construct
      provided for the sake of the example.  For instance: "The
      following YANG module is an example showing how a deviation could
      be used for this scenario; it is not a normative part of this
      specification."  This clarification is important for human readers
      and reviewers to avoid any confusion.

   By following these practices, authors can include necessary YANG
   deviations or supplemental modules to support their examples while
   making it clear that these are not part of the official data model
   being defined.  Tools that extract and compile YANG modules from the
   document can be instructed to either ignore these example-only
   modules or handle them separately.  For example, a tool might compile
   them only in the context of validating the corresponding example, and
   not raise an error about their presence or treat them as missing
   normative modules in the draft.

3.  YANG Module Coverage by Examples

   Providing examples in YANG model documents is not just helpful for
   readers, but can also improve the quality of the model itself.  We
   introduce the concept of YANG module coverage as a way to measure how
   thoroughly the provided examples exercise the data model.

   By analogy to code coverage in software testing (which checks what
   fraction of code is executed by tests), YANG module coverage looks at
   what fraction of a module's schema nodes are present in at least one
   of the example instances.  More specifically, we can define coverage
   as the set of data nodes (particularly leaf nodes) from the YANG
   module that have a value in one or more example instances.  A simple
   quantitative metric could be the percentage of the module's leaf
   nodes that appear in at least one example.

   For instance, if a YANG module defines 100 configurable or state leaf
   nodes, and the examples collectively include 45 of those leaves, one
   could say the example coverage is 45%. This number, while not telling
   the whole story, gives an indication of how much of the model's
   functionality is demonstrated by the examples.  Low coverage might
   suggest that important parts of the model are never shown in any
   example.  This could mean those parts are either less relevant or
   simply that the document might benefit from additional examples to
   cover them.

   Probably more helpful than the coverage percentage, we can also
   define a "non-coverage tree" - essentially a view of the data model
   highlighting the nodes that were not covered by any example.  This is
   perhaps the most direct way of showing the authors which portions of
   their model remain unused in the examples.  For example, a tool could
   output a tree or list of all leaf nodes not present in any example
   instance, indicating potential gaps in example coverage.

   This kind of feedback can help authors identify gaps and improve
   their documents.  If a particular feature or branch of the model has
   no example, the authors might choose to add one for completeness or
   clarity.  In some cases, it might reveal that certain parts of the
   model are hard to exemplify or not yet implemented, which could
   prompt re-thinking that part of the design or at least adding an
   explanation for why it's not covered by any example.

   Coverage works directly on the data nodes from the YANG module.  It
   should be as simple as possible, therefore, we will consider that any
   data leaf under a list is covered if there is at least an example
   with an instance of the list that includes the leaf.  That is, for a
   list with 2 different leafs, one leaf covered under one key and
   another under another one will still yield a 100% coverage of the
   list.

3.1.  Coverage Example

   Consider this simple YANG module:

   module example-device {
     namespace "http://example.com/device";
     prefix "dev";

     container device {
       leaf hostname { type string; }
       leaf location { type string; }
       leaf admin-state { type boolean; }

       list interface {
         key "name";
         leaf name { type string; }
         leaf enabled { type boolean; }
         leaf other { type boolean; }
       }
     }
   }

   And this example instance:

   <CODE BEGINS> file "device-config.instance.xml"
   <device xmlns="http://example.com/device">
     <hostname>router1</hostname>
     <interface>
       <name>eth0</name>
       <enabled>true</enabled>
     </interface>
   </device>
   <CODE ENDS>

   Coverage analysis shows:

   - Total data nodes: 6 (hostname, location, admin-state, interface/
   name, interface/enabled, interface/other)

   - Covered nodes: 3 (hostname, interface/name, interface/enabled)

   - Coverage percentage: 50%

   Non-coverage tree (missing nodes):

   device
   ├── location
   ├── admin-state
   └── interface
       └── other

   This analysis helps authors identify that the 'location' and 'admin-
   state' leafs need examples.

3.2.  Coverage Across Multiple Documents

   It is common that a YANG module defined in one document might be
   used, extended, or exemplified in another document.  Examples could
   be spread across multiple RFCs or drafts (for instance, a base YANG
   module in an RFC and a usage guide in a separate draft that provides
   additional examples).  While our primary focus is on coverage within
   a single document's scope (i.e. how well the examples in this
   document cover this document's module), one could imagine tooling
   that aggregates examples from multiple sources for a more holistic
   coverage analysis.  For example, if module A is defined in RFC X, and
   RFC Y (perhaps a companion or a applicability statement) provides
   additional examples for module A, a combined coverage analysis across
   X and Y would give a better picture of how module A is covered in
   total.  We will strive to define approaches that enable tooling to do
   this kind of multi-document coverage assessment automatically in the
   future.

   For the concept of YANG packages [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-packages], the
   coverage across the entire package might be of interest.

   For the to-be-created ONIONS Working Group, the coverage across
   (service) abstractions might be of interest.

4.  Implementation

   TODO.  The progress of this document depends on the correct operation
   of its proposal in cases of relative complexity using an actual
   implementation.

5.  Conclusion

   By standardizing how YANG examples are included and validated, we
   make it easier for implementers and reviewers to trust that the
   examples in a specification are correct and that a sufficient range
   of scenarios is covered.  The concept of YANG module coverage, while
   exploratory, can further encourage authors to include more
   comprehensive examples and help pinpoint which parts of a data model
   might need additional illustration.  Together, these measures aim to
   improve the overall quality and usability of YANG models in IETF
   documents.

   Ultimately, the success of these proposals will depend on tool
   support.  As a next step, developing proof-of-concept tools or
   integrations (for example, enhancements to existing YANG validators
   like yanglint, or new scripts to extract and analyze examples) will
   be crucial.  If moderately complex examples can be automatically
   extracted, validated, and measured for coverage with such tools, it
   will validate the approach.  On the other hand, if significant
   obstacles arise during implementation, the recommendations in this
   document may need to be refined.  Our hope is that these initial
   guidelines spark discussion and experimentation, leading to more
   robust support for YANG examples and better validation practices in
   the near future.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document defines guidelines for including and validating YANG
   examples in IETF documents.  The recommendations do not introduce new
   security risks.  However, implementers of validation tools should be
   aware of potential security considerations when processing example
   data from untrusted sources, such as denial of service attacks
   through maliciously crafted large or complex examples.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9195]  Lengyel, B. and B. Claise, "A File Format for YANG
              Instance Data", RFC 9195, DOI 10.17487/RFC9195, February
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9195>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-rfc8407bis]
              Bierman, A., Boucadair, M., and Q. Wu, "Guidelines for
              Authors and Reviewers of Documents Containing YANG Data
              Models", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              netmod-rfc8407bis-28, 5 June 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              rfc8407bis-28>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-packages]
              Wilton, R., Rahman, R., Clarke, J., and J. Sterne, "YANG
              Packages", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              netmod-yang-packages-07, 2 March 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-packages-07>.

   [RFC8407]  Bierman, A., "Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of
              Documents Containing YANG Data Models", RFC 8407,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8407, October 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8407>.

Authors' Addresses

   Camilo Cardona
   NTT
   164-168, Carrer de Numancia
   08029 Barcelona Catalonia
   Spain
   Email: camilo@gin.ntt.net


   Benoit Claise
   Everything OPS
   Email: benoit@everything-ops.net
